Title: 23086_Conformal_Prediction_Bey.pdf

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=KoVKLxn3Nb

Number of Pages: 34

Markdown Content:
# Conformal Prediction Beyond the Seen: A Missing Mass Perspective for Uncertainty Quantification in Generative Models 

Sima Noorani ∗

University of Pennsylvania 

nooranis@seas.upenn.edu 

Shayan Kiyani ∗

University of Pennsylvania 

shayank@seas.upenn.edu 

George Pappas 

University of Pennsylvania 

pappasg@seas.upenn.edu 

Hamed Hassani 

University of Pennsylvania 

hassani@seas.upenn.edu 

# Abstract 

Uncertainty quantification (UQ) is essential for safe deployment of generative AI models such as large language models (LLMs), especially in high-stakes appli-cations. Conformal prediction (CP) offers a principled uncertainty quantification framework, but classical methods focus on regression and classification, relying on geometric distances or softmax scores–tools that presuppose structured outputs. We depart from this paradigm by studying CP in a query-only setting, where pre-diction sets must be constructed solely from finite queries to a black-box generative model, introducing a new trade-off between coverage, test-time query budget, and informativeness. We introduce Conformal Prediction with Query Oracle (CPQ), a framework characterizing the optimal interplay between these objectives. Our finite-sample algorithm is built on two core principles: one governs the optimal query policy, and the other defines the optimal mapping from queried samples to prediction sets. Remarkably, both are rooted in the classical missing mass problem in statistics. Specifically, the optimal query policy depends on the rate of decay–or the derivative–of the missing mass, for which we develop a novel estimator. Meanwhile, the optimal mapping hinges on the missing mass itself, which we estimate using Good-Turing estimators. We then turn our focus to imple-menting our method for language models, particularly in open-ended LLM tasks involving question answering, multi-step reasoning, and structured information extraction, where outputs are vast, variable, and often under-specified. Fine-grained experiments 2on three real-world open-ended tasks and two LLMs, show CPQ’s applicability to any black-box LLM and highlight: (1) individual contribution of each principle to CPQ’s performance, and (2) CPQ’s ability to yield significantly more informative prediction sets than existing conformal methods for language uncertainty quantification. 

# 1 Introduction 

Generative models such as LLMs and diffusion models are widely deployed in high-stakes applica-tions, yet they often produce unreliable outputs. These models may generate plausible but incorrect information, hallucinate facts, or exhibit inconsistency across runs [ 1– 4 ]. Uncertainty quantifica-tion (UQ) is therefore essential for safe and trustworthy deployment of generative AI, enabling downstream users to detect unreliable outputs and make informed decisions under uncertainty. 

> ∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to: nooranis@seas.upenn.edu , shayank@seas.upenn.edu .

> 2

We release our code at https://github.com/nooranisima/CPQ-missing-mass 39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025). Conformal prediction (CP) is a statistical framework for UQ in supervised learning [ 5– 7], where input-output pairs (X, Y ) are drawn from an unknown distribution. Instead of a single prediction, CP produces prediction sets calibrated to include the true label with high probability. Formally, given a miscoverage level α ∈ (0 , 1) , CP guarantees P(Y ∈ C(X)) ≥ 1 − α, where C(X) is the prediction set for input X. This holds under minimal assumptions: CP is distribution-free and model-agnostic ,making it widely applicable. These properties have made CP a key tool in deploying ML systems in high-stakes settings. Recent work also shows that CP sets are essential for risk-sensitive decision making , where decisions must account for predictive uncertainty in a principled way [8]. CP has been extensively studied for classical tasks such as classification and regression [ 9– 12 ]. In these settings, uncertainty is typically expressed through prediction sets of the form {y : S(x, y ) ≤ q},where S(x, y ) is a nonconformity score measuring how atypical a label y is for a given input x,and q is a calibrated threshold. In regression, S(x, y ) might be |y − f (x)|, where f (x) is a trained model. In classification, the score is often based on softmax probabilities, such as 1 − fy (x), where 

fy (x) is the predicted probability for class y. However, this approach does not directly carry over to generative modeling—such as open-ended text generation—where outputs come from an immense, unstructured space of discrete sequences. While one can define similarity metrics over text or images, the core difficulty lies not in the absence of a distance, but in the fact that sets defined via these distances—such as “all outputs within a radius of q”—are typically intractable and hard to represent. In generative models like LLMs, the model does not expose a full probability distribution over the output space, but instead only provides a query oracle —a mechanism for sampling one output at a time. These challenges motivate the question: Can we design conformal prediction procedures that meaningfully quantify uncertainty when the model only provides samples of its output space? 

Recent works have made progress toward adapting CP to query-based generative models [ 13 , 14 ]. However, two key challenges remain mainly unresolved. First, querying at test time is resource intensive–more queries improve output exploration but incur substantial computational cost. Second, users often seek uncertainty quantification at high coverage levels (e.g., 90% ), even when the model’s few-shot accuracy is much lower (e.g., 60 − 70% ). In such regimes, some prediction sets are necessarily non-informative—effectively suggesting that the true output could be anything—because the model fails to produce it within the query budget. These challenges highlight a fundamental trade-off between coverage, informativeness, and test-time query cost. Our goal is to design conformal procedures that navigate this trade-off by minimizing the number of non-informative prediction sets while maintaining valid coverage under a limited query budget .A central insight in addressing this challenge is recognizing that the notion of missing mass plays a foundational role. When only a few outputs are sampled from a generative model–such as querying an LLM a handful of times for a prompt–the key question becomes: have we already seen a correct answer, or could the correct output still lie in the part of the distribution we haven’t sampled yet? This uncertainty about the correct label remaining unseen—the missing mass—is critical in deciding both whether to keep querying and how much confidence to place in the outputs we have. To formalize the trade-off between coverage, informativeness, and query cost, we introduce an optimization framework that jointly designs a query policy (how many queries to allocate per test point) and a set map (how to turn sampled outputs into calibrated prediction sets). Remarkably, both components connect to the classical missing mass problem in statistics (see [ 15 – 18 ]). The optimal query policy corresponds to controlling the rate of decrease in missing mass, while the optimal set construction relies on estimating the missing mass itself. We now summarize our main contributions: 

1) We introduce a novel optimization framework (Section 2) that formally captures the trade-off between coverage, informativeness, and test-time query budget in generative modeling UQ. This reinterprets conformal prediction from a budgeted query perspective and defines two interacting components: the query policy and the prediction set map, which connects sampled outputs to sets. 

2) We identify two key algorithmic principles that emerge from this framework. First, the optimal query policy prescribes querying each test input until the rate of decrease in missing mass falls below a threshold—that is, one should keep querying as long as an additional sample significantly reduces uncertainty. Second, the optimal map from sampled outputs to a set is defined by thresholding a particular conformity score that properly accounts for the missing mass . These principles extend conformal prediction to a fundamentally new setting and may be of independent theoretical interest. 23) In Section 4, we design a finite-sample algorithm that combines these principles, integrating the estimation of missing mass (and its rate of reduction) into the conformal prediction pipeline while provably maintaining valid, distribution-free coverage guarantees. A key technical contribution is a novel estimator for the rate of decrease in missing mass, derived by revisiting the classical Good–Turing estimator—originally developed to estimate the missing mass itself. 

4) We show the practical value of our approach through experiments on open-ended LLM tasks. Across three benchmark datasets, we quantify how each algorithmic principle contributes to prediction set informativeness under varying query and coverage constraints. Compared to recent query-based CP baselines [ 13 , 14 ], our method significantly reduces non-informative sets while maintaining valid coverage guarantees. These highlight the foundational role of our missing mass perspective in CP. 

1.1 Related works 

We briefly discuss closely related works here and defer a full discussion to Appendix A. 

Conformal Language Modeling. Conformal Language Modeling (CLM) was introduced by [ 13 ]and similar ideas further studied by [ 14 , 19 – 21 ]. CLM adapts conformal prediction to LLMs by calibrating a set of stopping rules that determine how many outputs to include in a prediction set. However, these methods do not account for uncertainty over unseen generations, and thus only provide valid sets for coverage levels less or equal than the few-shot accuracy of the underlying model. Furthermore, they do not explicitly optimize how the query budget is used across different prompts. In contrast, we provide valid prediction sets for any user-defined coverage level and query budget, using a principled framework that bridges conformal prediction with classical missing mass estimation to optimize set informativeness and query efficiency. We also compare against CLM methods in Section 5, demonstrating substantial gains in informativeness, under fixed query budgets. 

Conformal Abstention and Conformal Factuality. Conformal abstention algorithms refrain from generating a response when uncertainty is high [ 22 – 24 ]. Other works focus on aligning CP with LLM factuality in structured tasks [ 25 – 27 ], or filtering long-form generations by validating sub-claims [ 28 –31 ]. However, these methods do not construct prediction sets and are thus not directly comparable to ours, though connecting our framework with theirs presents an interesting direction for future work. 

# 2 Problem formulation 

In this section, we formalize the problem of conformal prediction with a query oracle. Consider a covariate space X and a potentially infinite label space Y. An input-output pair (X, Y ) ∈ X × Y 

is drawn from an unknown joint distribution p(x, y ), which represents the true data-generating process. For instance, in a text generation task, X could be a prompt and Y the correct or intended response. We assume access to a generative model, referred to as a query oracle , which allows us to sample from a conditional distribution π(y | x). That is, querying the oracle at input x yields an independent sample y ∼ π(· | x). Our goal is to construct prediction sets that provide rigorous coverage guarantees while querying the oracle a finite number of times per test input. More formally, for a user-specified miscoverage level α ∈ (0 , 1) , we seek to ensure the following coverage guarantee: 

P(X,Y )∼p [Y ∈ C(X)] ≥ 1 − α. (1) Even though C(X) should be constructed using only a finite number of queries to π(y|x), which may differ from p(y|x), the coverage constraint in (1) is with respect to p(y|x). This distinction is crucial: while π governs the observable behavior of the model, coverage must be guaranteed with respect to the true, unknown distribution p.In classical CP, one defines a nonconformity score function S : X × Y → R to measure how atypical a label y is for an input x, and constructs prediction sets of the form C(x) = {y ∈ Y : S(x, y ) ≤ q},where q is a calibrated threshold. To use such a construction in practice, one must either enumerate the label space Y, as in multi-class classification, or describe the set compactly, such as an interval when Y = R. However, in tasks such as text generation, sets defined as {y ∈ Y : S(x, y ) ≤ q}, when 

Y is the space of all the text sequences, are not a tractable representation for uncertainty. That is, there is no clear practical way to list all these labels or describe them using an interpretable structure (like an interval). Hence, the standard paradigm of defining a score function and calibrating a threshold 3may not fully capture the nature of uncertainty in generative models. Instead, generative models allow for exploring the output space by multiple queries. What is missing is a perspective that views uncertainty through the lens of querying the generative model–that is, sampling from the oracle. In this view, the information about the true label comes from a finite set of queries: Zt(x) = {yx 

> 1

, . . . , y xt }, where x is a test point and t is the number of queries. This multiple-query setting introduces a key limitation: the correct label Y may not be among the queried outputs. This scenario is common in practice–e.g., when using an LLM as the oracle to generate possible responses to a prompt. If none of the generated completions contains the correct answer, we have no signal to recover it. In such cases, there is no choice but to admit high uncertainty and acknowledge that the correct label could lie anywhere in the vast, unseen remainder of Y.To address this, we introduce a special abstract label EE , short for “Everything Else”, which denotes the collection Y \ Z(x). Intuitively, when the model has not yet produced the correct output in its first t queries, the only way to ensure coverage is to include EE in the prediction set. With this formulation, the prediction set C(x) is a subset of Z(x) ∪ EE . The CP coverage guarantee 

P(Y ∈ C(X)) ≥ 1 − α then admits the interpretation: either the true label Y is among the sampled outputs, or it is captured by EE . Including EE ensures valid coverage even when the true label has not been observed. The key challenge, then, is to avoid including EE unnecessarily—so as to keep prediction sets informative—while still maintaining coverage guarantees across all test points. This creates a fundamental trade-off: querying the oracle more increases the chance of capturing the correct label explicitly, reducing reliance on EE ; querying less conserves resources but often necessitates including EE , resulting in less informative predictions. To rigorously navigate this trade-off, we formalize an optimization framework that balances coverage, query cost, and informativeness. Our framework consists of two components. The first is a query policy T : X → N ∪ { 0}, which determines how many i.i.d. queries to make to the oracle for each input x. This effectively allocates the total query budget across test inputs. For each input x, we query the oracle π(y|x) independently 

T (x) times, producing a sampled label set Z(T ; x) = {yx 

> 1

, . . . , y xT (x)} for each x.The second component is a set map f : X × 2Y → 2Y′

, which converts the queried labels into a prediction set C(x) = f (x, Z (T ; x)) , where Y′ = Y ∪ EE . Given a finite computational query budget 

B and a user-defined miscoverage rate α ∈ [0 , 1] , our goal is to design T and f jointly to ensure valid coverage while maximizing the informativeness of the prediction sets under the budget constraint. 

Conformal Prediction with Query Oracle (CPQ) 

minimize   

> f(·), T (·)

EX∼p

h

λ1{EE ∈ C(X)} + P  

> y̸=EE

1{y ∈ C(X)}

i

subject to Pr (X,Y )∼p[Y ∈ C(X)] ≥ 1 − α

EX∼p[T (X)] ≤ B

We minimize two forms of uninformative prediction sets: one by the inclusion of EE , the other by the size of the prediction set. Whenever EE ∈ C(x), the conditional coverage at x is trivially satisfied: 

P[Y ∈ C(x) | X = x] = 1 . Thus, including EE guarantees coverage but offers no useful information. Penalizing EE is therefore essential: the challenge lies not in achieving coverage, but in doing so while using EE as infrequently as possible. The parameter λ ≥ 0 controls the penalty ratio. We focus on the regime where λ ≫ 1, expressing a strong preference for minimizing the use of EE across the population. However, the second term remains important to prioritize smaller sets among those that avoid EE maximally. In the next section, we analyze this objective to uncover two key algorithmic principles. These principles will ultimately guide the design of our practical, finite-sample algorithm. 

# 3 Algorithmic Principles 

The CPQ problem introduced above is a joint optimization over two components: the query policy 

T (·) and set map f (·). In this section, we adopt a decoupled analysis, splitting the problem into two stages. First, we fix a query budget and ask: What is the optimal query policy for allocating queries to minimize the chance of missing the correct label? Then, given a fixed query policy, we ask: What is the optimal set map for constructing informative prediction sets while ensuring valid coverage? 

4It is worth noting that this decoupled analysis only approximates the full CPQ solution, as it breaks the joint optimization over T and f . Accordingly, optimality in this section refers to the best solution within each stage, rather than the overall joint optimum. To answer these questions, we work in the population regime, assuming the query oracle π(y | x)

is the same as the true conditional distribution p(y | x). Consequently, we assume throughout this section that π ≡ p; i.e., the query oracle is perfect . This idealized setting allows us to derive two algorithmic principles—one for query policy and one for prediction set construction—that form the foundation of our finite-sample algorithm. In Section 4, we show how to apply these principles with any black-box query oracle (e.g., an LLM), particularly when π(y|x)̸ = p(y|x), to construct practical prediction sets with finite-sample coverage guarantees. Proofs are deferred to Appendix B. 

3.1 Principle 1: Optimal Querying Policy by Missing Mass Minimization 

We now focus on the query policy, aiming to allocate queries across covariate points to minimize the chance of missing the correct label. If computational resources were unlimited, we could query the oracle exhaustively for each input x, fully uncovering the label distribution and removing the need for the abstract label EE . But under a finite budget, we must query strategically—balancing where and how much to query—an objective naturally captured by the concept of missing mass .Formally, the missing mass for a covariate x after t queries is defined as the probability that the true label Y is not among the sampled set Zt(x):

θ(x, t ) = Pr 

> Y,Z t(x)

Y /∈ Zt(x) | X = x,

where Zt(x) consists of t i.i.d. samples from p(y | x). Intuitively, θ(x, t ) measures residual uncertainty–the chance that t independent draws from p(y | x) fail to capture the true label. As t

increases, θ(x, t ) naturally decreases, and does so with diminishing returns : each additional query is less likely to reduce uncertainty than the previous one. To make this precise, define the finite difference as ∆( x, t ) := θ(x, t + 1) − θ(x, t ). For each x, ∆( x, t ) is negative and non-decreasing in 

t, meaning θ(x, t ) is non-increasing with diminishing returns (see Appendix B for proofs). These properties make missing mass a natural objective for query policy. For each input x, increasing the number of queries t reduces the probability of missing the true label—i.e., lowers θ(x, t )—and eventually, we may no longer need to include EE in the prediction set for that x. However, since our total query budget is limited, we cannot afford to exhaustively query all inputs. This raises the core question: how should we allocate our finite budget across different covariates to minimize overall uncertainty? That is, which inputs should receive more queries to reduce reliance on EE most effectively? This naturally leads to the following optimization problem: 

min   

> T(·): X → N∪{ 0}

EX

θ(X, T (X)) 

subject to EX [T (X)] ≤ B. 

(2) 

Theorem 3.1 (Optimal Query Policy) . Assuming X is a continuous random variable, let T ∗(·) be the optimal solution to the optimization problem (2) . Then, there exists a constant β∗ ∈ R such that, for all x ∈ X almost surely, the optimal query size T ∗(x) satisfies: 

∆( x, T ∗(x) − 1) ≤ β∗ < ∆( x, T ∗(x) + 1) (3) This condition implies that at the optimal query number T ∗(x) for each x, the discrete derivative 

∆( x, T ∗(x)) from one more query is approximately equal to the threshold β∗ (note that ∆( x, t ) is non-decreasing in t). This result suggests a simple and intuitive principle: continue querying the oracle for a given x as long as doing so substantially reduces the missing mass. In other words, we should stop sampling when the gain from an additional query falls below a threshold β∗. This behavior is directly driven by the diminishing returns property of θ(x, t ) and constitutes our first algorithmic principle. This insight guides the query policy in our finite-sample algorithm in Section 4, where we replace the exact derivative ∆( x, t ) with a data-driven estimate ˆ∆( x, t ), and stop querying when ˆ∆( x, t ) ≤ β∗, with β∗ calibrated from finite samples to satisfy the query budget B.53.2 Principle 2: Optimal Prediction Sets by Missing Mass Estimation 

In this section, we assume we are given access to a predetermined and known query policy function 

T : X → N, which specifies the number of i.i.d. queries made to the oracle for each input x. For each 

x ∈ X , we denote the resulting set of sampled labels by Z(T, x ) = {yx 

> 1

, . . . , y xT (x)}. With these samples in hand, our goal is to construct prediction sets that satisfy the desired coverage guarantee while being as informative as possible. To achieve this, we formulate an optimization problem to determine the best possible prediction sets under coverage constraints. The primary goal is twofold: (1) minimize the inclusion of the abstract label EE , as its presence indicates complete uncertainty, and (2) among sets with minimal inclusion of 

EE , minimizing the prediction set sizes. Reminding f : X × 2Y → 2Y′

and C(x) = f (x, Z (T ; x)) 

from Section 2, we introduce: 

min   

> f(·)

EX

λ1{EE ∈ C(X)} + X 

> y̸=EE

1{y ∈ C(X)}



subject to Pr 

> X,Y

Y ∈ C(X) ≥ 1 − α, 

(4) The parameter λ ≥ 0 balances the trade-off between avoiding EE and keeping prediction sets small. We are particularly interested in the regime where λ is large. This reflects a strict preference for minimizing the use of EE , while still allowing the optimization to differentiate among prediction sets that achieve the same frequency of EE inclusion. The inclusion of the second term ensures that among all valid prediction rules minimizing EE , we favor the most informative ones with smaller set sizes. Next, we characterize the structure of the optimal set map solution to (4) in the following theorem. 

Theorem 3.2 (Optimal Set-Assignment Policy) . Assuming X is a continuous random variable, for sufficiently large values of λ, the optimal solution f ∗ 

> λ

to the optimization problem (4) has the following structure: there exists a scalar threshold q∗ ∈ R+ satisfying 

f ∗(x, Z (x)) = {y ∈ Z(x) ∪ { EE } : S(x, y ) ≤ q∗}, almost surely for every x. 

Also, defining p(EE |x) = Pr Y

Y /∈ Zt(x) | X = x, we have, 

S(x, y ) = 

1 − p(y | x), if y̸ = EE ,

2 − p(y | x), if y = EE . (5) Theorem 3.2 shows that the optimal prediction sets can be constructed by thresholding a conformity score S(x, y ). This score prioritizes explicitly sampled labels over the abstract label EE , ensuring that EE is included only if necessary. Specifically, EE is assigned a score of 2 − p(EE | x), where 

p(EE | x) corresponds exactly to the missing mass. This means EE is most likely to be included when the missing mass is high–an intuitive and desirable behavior. Moreover, this result generalizes the classic finding in conformal prediction that optimal prediction sets minimizing size under a coverage constraint are obtained by thresholding 1 − p(y | x), in classification and regression [32, 33]. To summarize, we have derived two foundational principles: one connecting the optimal query policy to the derivative of the missing mass, and the other connecting the optimal set map to the missing mass itself through an optimal conformity score. In the next section, we build upon these principles to design a practical finite-sample algorithm. 

# 4 Finite Sample Algorithm 

In this section, we present our finite-sample algorithm, which consists of two modules, each carefully built upon the algorithmic principles derived in Section 3. The query module relies on an estimator of the missing mass derivative , denoted ˆ∆( x, t ), while the calibration module uses an estimator of the 

missing mass itself, ˆθ(x, t )–both of which we detail below. 

Estimating Missing Mass and Its Derivative. Let Y be the label space, and suppose we observe a sequence of t i.i.d samples Zt(x) = {yx 

> 1

, . . . , y xt } ∼ π(y|x), i.e., samples from the oracle. The 6missing mass, θ(x, t ), is defined as the total probability of all labels in Y that have not been observed in the sample Zt(x). For each integer r ≥ 0, let Nr (x, t ) denote the number of distinct labels that occur exactly r times in the sample Zt(x). In other words, Nr (x, t ) = |{ y ∈ Zt(x) : #( y) = r}| ,where #( y) denotes the number of times the label y appears in the sample Zt(x).The classical Good-Turing estimator approximates the missing mass based on the labels seen exactly once, aka singletons . The intuition is simple in that if many labels appear only once, it is likely that there are more yet-unseen labels with comparable probabilities. This yields the estimator 

ˆθ(x, t ) := N1 

> t

. In fact, Good-Turing estimators also provide estimates for seen labels. For y ∈

Zt(x), we estimate p(y | x) using the Good–Turing formula: ˆω(y | x) = r+1  

> t

· N r +1  

> Nr

, where r is the number of times y appears in Zt(x). Hence, we estimate the conformity score derived in our optimal set construction (see Eq. (5)) by ˆS(x, y ) = 

(

1 − ˆω(y | x), if y ∈ Zt(x)2 − ˆθ(x, t ), if y / ∈ Zt(x) .On the other hand, the query module requires an estimate for the missing mass derivative ∆( x, t ) = 

θ(x, t + 1) − θ(x, t ), which captures the reduction in missing mass from drawing an additional sample. By revisiting the original calculations behind the classical Good-Turing estimator, we derive the following novel estimator for the derivative: ˆ∆( x, t ) := − 2N2 

> t2

.Interestingly, we see that while the Good-Turing estimator relates the missing mass to the count of 

singletons , our estimator for the derivative reveals that the count of doubletons , number of unique labels that appear twice, is a good proxy for the rate at which the missing mass decreases. A detailed derivation is provided in Appendix D.1. Furthermore, we will showcase the empirical performance of this estimator on two synthetic distributions in Appendix D.2, along with comparisons against a natural baseline: the plug-in estimate of the derivative computed by taking finite differences of the Good-Turing missing mass estimates at successive values of t.

Algorithm. Assume we have access to a query oracle π(y|x) that approximates–but may not perfectly match–the true conditional distribution p(y|x). By querying this oracle, we can draw independent samples from π(y|x) for each input x, and compute quantities such as the missing mass (or its derivative) as needed. Additionally, we are given calibration data Dcal = ( Xi, Y i)Ni=1 drawn from the ground truth distribution p(x, y ), as is standard in CP. To tune the query threshold β∗, we first partition the calibration data Dcal into two disjoint subsets 

Dcal 1 and Dcal 2 . The first subset Dcal 1 is used exclusively for tuning β∗ as follows: for each input 

x ∈ Dcal 1 , draw a set of queries y1: T (x) ∼ π(y|x), where T (x) is the smallest integer number at which ˆ∆( x, T (x)) ≤ β∗. Given a query budget constraint B, select β∗ such that the average number of queries 1 

> |Dcal 1|

P 

> x

T (x) ≤ B. Since β∗ is a scalar, this can be done via exhaustive search on a grid of values. Once β∗ is fixed, we apply our algorithm presented in Algorithm 1. 

Algorithm 1 Conformal Prediction with Query Oracle (CPQ) 

Input: Query oracle π(y | x), conformity score ˆS(x, y ), calibration data Dcal 2 , test point xtest ,miscoverage α, query budget B, missing-mass estimator ˆ∆( x, t ), threshold β∗

Query Module → Principle 1 

• For each x ∈ D cal 2 ∪ { xtest }:• Sample y1: T (x) ∼ π(y | x) until ˆ∆( x, T (x)) ≤ β∗. Let Z(x) = {y1, . . . , y T (x)}.

Calibration Module → Principle 2 

• For each (xi, y i) ∈ D cal 2 compute si = ˆS(xi, y i).• Set q∗ = Quantile 1−α

 s1, . . . , s |D cal 2 |, ∞.

Output: C(xtest ) =  y ∈ Z(xtest ) ∪ { EE } : ˆS(xtest , y ) ≤ q∗ .

7The algorithm consists of two stages, each directly motivated by the algorithmic principles derived in Section 3. In the first stage-the query module -we determine how many queries to draw for each input 

x. We query sequentially from the query oracle π(y | x) (e.g. an LLM), one at a time, and after each draw, we update the estimated missing mass derivative ˆ∆( x, t ). Guided by principle 1 , we continue sampling until ˆ∆( x, t ) falls below the threshold β∗. The result of this stage is a set Z(x) of observed labels for each input x, along with the associated estimated missing mass for the fallback label EE .In the second stage- the calibration module -motivated by principle 2 , we calculate the conformity scores ˆS(x, y ) on a held-out calibration set Dcal 2 as described earlier in this Section. We then compute the (1 − α)-quantile of the conformity scores on Dcal 2 (adjusted with ∞ for proper debiasing), and use this threshold to construct prediction sets for test inputs, following the standard split conformal procedure. The following theorem guarantees the distribution-free coverage validity of our algorithm. 

Theorem 4.1 (Coverage Validity) . Assuming Dtest and Dcal 2 are exchangeable, we have: 

Pr[ Ytest ∈ C(Xtest )] ≥ 1 − α, 

where the probability is over (Xtest , Y test ) and Dcal 2 .

In summary, CPQ adaptively query the oracle guided by an estimation of derivative of the missing mass, and then make prediction sets guided by Good-Turing estimate of the missing mass itself. 

# 5 Experimental Results 

We begin by outlining our experimental setup, then present empirical evaluations along two main axes: (i) a component-wise analysis isolating the impact of optimal querying and optimal conformal calibration (Section 3), and (ii) a comparison against state-of-the-art conformal language modeling baselines, including CLM [13] and its recent variant, SCOPE-Gen [14]. 

Datsets and Models . We evaluate on three benchmark datasets using two leading LLMs, adapting all tasks to open-eneded generation by removing any multiple-choice structure. Generations are lexically normalized and marked correct only if they exactly match the ground truth answer; i.e evaluating using the exact match metric. The datasets are: (i) BBH Geometric Shapes [ 34 ] (250 prompts) :Visual reasoning from SVG paths, with responses generated using LLaMA-3 8B-Instruct [ 35 ]. (ii) GSM8K [ 36 ] (300 randomly selected prompts) : Multi-step arithmetic reasoning, answers from Mixtral-8x7B-Instruct [ 37 ]. (iii) BBH Date Understanding [ 34 ] (250 prompts) : Temporal reasoning; responses generated using LLaMA-3 8B-Instruct. 

Evaluation Metrics . Our goal is to construct prediction sets that are both valid and informative .We report three key evaluation metrics. First, Empirical Coverage : the fraction of test examples whose prediction set contains either the correct answer or EE , either ensures validity ( see Section 2). Second, EE fraction measures how often EE appears; lower fractions indicate the model more often explicitly captures the correct answer without relying on fallback coverage via EE . Third, Average set size : the average number of seen labels per prediction set. While larger sets generally imply less informative sets, a larger set without EE conveys more information than a smaller set with EE , as the former expresses uncertainty within observed outputs, whereas the latter signals residual uncertainty over the entire unobserved label space. Together, these metrics capture the tradeoff between coverage and informativeness. An ideal prediction set achieves target coverage with minimal reliance on EE .

Clustering . Clustering is a key step in our pipeline. Since LLMs produce lexically varied outputs that convey the same meaning, we group generations into semantic equivalence classes ( clusters ), each corresponding to a single label y ∈ Y . We use LLaMA-3-8B-Instruct model to decide if two generations semantically equivalant and assign them to the same cluster if so. This approach has proven effective for handling complex and unstructured outputs [ 19 , 38 ]. Prompts and implementation details are provided in Appendix C.5. Each cluster’s frequency is used to estimate the missing mass 

(probability of unseen clusters) and its derivative (see Section 4). Probabilities for seen clusters are computed by normalizing frequencies and scaling to form a valid distribution over both seen and unseen clusters. Importantly, our finite sample algorithm is modular: it works with any clustering or probability estimation method. As long as clustering and associated probabilities are well defined and valid, our method applies. 

Calibration and sampling procedures. For each dataset, we randomly split examples equally into calibration and test sets. On the calibration set, we tune CPQ’s sampling threshold β∗ to meet the 8Figure 1: Performance of the three algorithmic variants (Vanilla, P1, P1+P2 : corresponds to our full finite sample algorithm, i.e CPQ) across Geo Shapes (B = 30) , GSM8k (B = 7) , and BBH-Date 

(B = 20) . Each row shows coverage, EE fraction, and average set size as a function of 1 − α.target average query budget and estimate the threshold q∗ for constructing prediction sets. All results are averaged over 50 random splits of calibration and test data. 

5.1 Fine-grained Component-wise Analysis 

To assess contributions of each algorithmic principle (Section 3), we compare three progressively refined variants: (i) Vanilla : A baseline with a fixed, non-adaptive querying strategy—the same number of generations per input—and a simple, yet valid calibration rule. While not optimal, this baseline serves as a reasonable starting point. Calibration details are provided in the Appendix C.1. (ii) Principle 1 : Adds our adaptive querying, adjusting the number of queries based on the estimated missing mass derivative, with calibration unchanged. (iii) Principle 1 + 2 : Combines both optimal querying and conformal calibration, representing the full CPQ algorithm in Section 4. Figure 1 shows results on all benchmark datasets. We observe consistent gains from incorporating each algorithmic principle, with the full CPQ algorithm (both principles combined) achieving the largest reduction in the fraction of prediction sets that include the fallback label EE , while maintaining valid coverage. The query budget B is fixed per dataset, while the coverage level 1 − α is varied. Budgets were chosen to reflect reasonable intermediate values based on the few-shot model accuracy for each dataset. Additional results across a range of budgets can be found in Appendix C.2. We see that CPQ navigates a clear trade-off between reducing reliance on the fallback label EE and using observed labels. Both Principle 1 and the full CPQ algorithm (Principles 1+2) actively leverage the queried labels to avoid including EE while maintaining valid coverage. The additional reduction in EE fraction achieved by the full CPQ algorithm naturally comes at a cost: the number of non-EE 

labels included in the prediction set increases, leading to larger set sizes. This behavior is expected since aggressively minimizing reliance on EE requires exploiting the observed labels more fully to preserve coverage. 9Dataset Algorithm Nom. Cov. Emp. Cov. EE Frac.                                                                

> Geo
> CLM 0.60 0.58 ±0.038 0.40 ±0.047
> Scope-Gen 0.60 0.68 ±0.080 0.38 ±0.22
> CPQ 0.60 0.61 ±0.06 0.07 ±0.07
> GSM8K
> CLM 0.95 0.93 ±0.03 0.70 ±0.11
> Scope-Gen 0.95 0.93 ±0.05 0.61 ±0.26
> CPQ 0.95 0.95 ±0.02 0.16 ±0.14
> Date
> CLM 0.70 0.68 ±0.07 0.32 ±0.11
> Scope-Gen 0.70 0.78 ±0.07 0.51 ±0.11
> CPQ 0.70 0.71 ±0.07 0.25 ±0.08

Table 1: Comparison of nominal coverage, empirical coverage, and the fraction of sets that contain the fallback label ( EE ) across three benchmark datasets (Geometric shapes (Geo), GSM8K, Date understanding (Date)) for three methods: CLM, Scope-Gen, and our proposed CPQ. 

5.2 Comparison with Conformal Baselines 

We now compare CPQ to two recent conformal prediction methods for large language models: 

CLM [13 ] and its variant SCOPE-Gen [ 14 ]. While both represent state-of-the-art in this space, they are not out-of-the-box comparable with CPQ in two key ways. First, neither accounts for the missing mass—the residual probability over unseen labels represented by EE in our framework. As a result, they may fail to provide valid configurations at higher coverage levels, especially when the correct answer isn’t among the sampled outputs. Second, they lack an explicit mechanism to control query budget: the number of model queries varies across coverage levels and is not directly tunable. To enable a meaningful comparison, we evaluate CLM and SCOPE-Gen using their original procedures, with one adjustment: we augment their output space to include the abstract label EE 

alongside sampled responses. The underlying logic and mechanisms remain unchanged; we simply extend the prediction space to reflect the possibility of unseen correct label, which is necessary for a complete coverage analysis. This enables us to assess how often these baselines would have needed to include EE to satisfy coverage validity. Since, there is no principled way to configure these baselines to target a specific budget, we first measure their average query usage. We then tune CPQ ’s querying threshold β∗ to match this budget. All methods are thus evaluated on equal footing at the same nominal coverage level and under the same average query budget. As shown in Table 1, CPQ dramatically reduces reliance on EE . For example, on GSM8k at 95% 

nominal coverage, CPQ achieves the desired coverage with an EE fraction of 16 .5% , versus 70 .4% for CLM and 61% for SCOPE-Gen under the same budget constraints. Moreover, CPQ not only offers more informative prediction sets but also maintains tighter coverage, especially in high-coverage regimes where baselines struggle. 

# 6 Conclusion and Limitations 

We presented a principled framework for UQ by introducing a novel missing mass perspective. we derived two algorithmic principles that guide optimal query policy and prediction set construction. Our finite-sample algorithm integrates these insights and yields significantly more informative prediction sets compared to existing conformal methods for LLM UQ. Our method relies on estimation of missing mass and its derivative, which can be challenging in very low query regimes. 

# 7 acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the NSF Institute for CORE Emerging Methods in Data Science (EnCORE) and the ASSET (AI-Enabled Systems: Safe, Explainable and Trustworthy) Center. 10 References 

[1] Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong, Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qiang-long Chen, Weihua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, et al. A survey on hallucination in large language models: Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions. ACM Transactions on Information Systems , 43(2):1–55, 2025. [2] Junyi Li, Jie Chen, Ruiyang Ren, Xiaoxue Cheng, Wayne Xin Zhao, Jian-Yun Nie, and Ji-Rong Wen. The dawn after the dark: An empirical study on factuality hallucination in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.03205 , 2024. [3] Nick McKenna, Tianyi Li, Liang Cheng, Mohammad Javad Hosseini, Mark Johnson, and Mark Steedman. Sources of hallucination by large language models on inference tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14552 , 2023. [4] Sebastian Farquhar, Jannik Kossen, Lorenz Kuhn, and Yarin Gal. Detecting hallucinations in large language models using semantic entropy. Nature , 630(8017):625–630, 2024. [5] Volodya Vovk, Alexander Gammerman, and Craig Saunders. Machine-learning applications of algorithmic randomness. 1999. [6] Craig Saunders, Alex Gammerman, and Volodya Vovk. Transduction with confidence and credibility. 1999. [7] Vladimir Vovk, Alexander Gammerman, and Glenn Shafer. Algorithmic learning in a random world , volume 29. Springer, 2005. [8] Shayan Kiyani, George Pappas, Aaron Roth, and Hamed Hassani. Decision theoretic foundations for conformal prediction: Optimal uncertainty quantification for risk-averse agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.02561 , 2025. [9] Glenn Shafer and Vladimir Vovk. A tutorial on conformal prediction. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 9(3), 2008. [10] Yaniv Romano, Evan Patterson, and Emmanuel Candes. Conformalized quantile regression. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. [11] Anastasios Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Jitendra Malik, and Michael I Jordan. Uncertainty sets for image classifiers using conformal prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.14193 , 2020. [12] Jing Lei, Max G’Sell, Alessandro Rinaldo, Ryan J Tibshirani, and Larry Wasserman. Distribution-free predictive inference for regression. Journal of the American Statistical Associ-ation , 113(523):1094–1111, 2018. [13] Victor Quach, Adam Fisch, Tal Schuster, Adam Yala, Jae Ho Sohn, Tommi S. Jaakkola, and Regina Barzilay. Conformal language modeling, 2024. [14] Klaus-Rudolf Kladny, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Michael Muehlebach. Conformal generative modeling with improved sample efficiency through sequential greedy filtering, 2025. [15] William A Gale and Geoffrey Sampson. Good-turing frequency estimation without tears. 

Journal of quantitative linguistics , 2(3):217–237, 1995. [16] Alon Orlitsky and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Competitive distribution estimation: Why is good-turing good. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 28, 2015. [17] David A McAllester and Robert E Schapire. On the convergence rate of good-turing estimators. In COLT , pages 1–6, 2000. [18] Alon Orlitsky, Narayana P Santhanam, and Junan Zhang. Always good turing: Asymptotically optimal probability estimation. Science , 302(5644):427–431, 2003. [19] Ramneet Kaur, Colin Samplawski, Adam D. Cobb, Anirban Roy, Brian Matejek, Manoj Acharya, Daniel Elenius, Alexander M. Berenbeim, John A. Pavlik, Nathaniel D. Bastian, and Susmit Jha. Addressing uncertainty in llms to enhance reliability in generative ai, 2024. 11 [20] Hooman Shahrokhi, Devjeet Raj Roy, Yan Yan, Venera Arnaoudova, and Janaradhan Rao Doppa. Conformal prediction sets for deep generative models via reduction to conformal regression. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.10512 , 2025. [21] Jiayuan Su, Jing Luo, Hongwei Wang, and Lu Cheng. Api is enough: Conformal prediction for large language models without logit-access, 2024. [22] Yasin Abbasi Yadkori, Ilja Kuzborskij, David Stutz, András György, Adam Fisch, Arnaud Doucet, Iuliya Beloshapka, Wei-Hung Weng, Yao-Yuan Yang, Csaba Szepesvári, Ali Taylan Cemgil, and Nenad Tomasev. Mitigating llm hallucinations via conformal abstention, 2024. [23] Sina Tayebati, Divake Kumar, Nastaran Darabi, Dinithi Jayasuriya, Ranganath Krishnan, and Amit Ranjan Trivedi. Learning conformal abstention policies for adaptive risk management in large language and vision-language models, 2025. [24] Yasin Abbasi Yadkori, Ilja Kuzborskij, András György, and Csaba Szepesvári. To believe or not to believe your llm, 2024. [25] Dennis Ulmer, Chrysoula Zerva, and André F. T. Martins. Non-exchangeable conformal language generation with nearest neighbors, 2024. [26] Yu Gui, Ying Jin, and Zhimei Ren. Conformal alignment: Knowing when to trust foundation models with guarantees, 2024. [27] Bhawesh Kumar, Charlie Lu, Gauri Gupta, Anil Palepu, David Bellamy, Ramesh Raskar, and Andrew Beam. Conformal prediction with large language models for multi-choice question answering, 2023. [28] John J. Cherian, Isaac Gibbs, and Emmanuel J. Candès. Large language model validity via enhanced conformal prediction methods, 2024. [29] Christopher Mohri and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Language models with conformal factuality guarantees, 2024. [30] Terrance Liu and Zhiwei Steven Wu. Multi-group uncertainty quantification for long-form text generation, 2024. [31] Maxon Rubin-Toles, Maya Gambhir, Keshav Ramji, Aaron Roth, and Surbhi Goel. Conformal language model reasoning with coherent factuality. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .[32] Mauricio Sadinle, Jing Lei, and Larry Wasserman. Least ambiguous set-valued classifiers with bounded error levels. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 114(525):223–234, 2019. [33] Shayan Kiyani, George J Pappas, and Hamed Hassani. Length optimization in conformal prediction. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:99519–99563, 2024. [34] Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Scales, Nathanael Schärli, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yi Tay, Hyung Won Chung, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Quoc V. Le, Ed H. Chi, Denny Zhou, and Jason Wei. Challeng-ing big-bench tasks and whether chain-of-thought can solve them, 2022. [35] AI@Meta. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024. [36] Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems, 2021. [37] Mistral AI. Mixtral of experts, 2024. [38] Lorenz Kuhn, Yarin Gal, and Sebastian Farquhar. Semantic uncertainty: Linguistic invariances for uncertainty estimation in natural language generation, 2023. [39] Samuel S Wilks. Determination of sample sizes for setting tolerance limits. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics , 12(1):91–96, 1941. 12 [40] Henry Scheffé and John W. Tukey. Non-parametric estimation. i. validation of order statistics. 

Annals of Mathematical Statistics , 16(2):187–192, jun 1945. [41] C. Saunders, A. Gammerman, and V. Vovk. Transduction with confidence and credibility. In 

Proceedings of the 16th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence - Volume 2 ,IJCAI’99, page 722–726, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1999. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. [42] Yaniv Romano, Matteo Sesia, and Emmanuel J. Candès. Classification with valid and adaptive coverage, 2020. [43] Harris Papadopoulos, Volodya Vovk, and Alex Gammerman. Conformal prediction with neural networks. In 19th IEEE International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence(ICTAI 2007) , volume 2, pages 388–395, 2007. [44] Harris Papadopoulos, Kostas Proedrou, Volodya Vovk, and Alex Gammerman. Inductive confidence machines for regression. In Tapio Elomaa, Heikki Mannila, and Hannu Toivonen, editors, Machine Learning: ECML 2002 , pages 345–356, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2002. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. [45] Jing Lei, Max G’Sell, Alessandro Rinaldo, Ryan J. Tibshirani, and Larry Wasserman. Distribution-free predictive inference for regression, 2017. [46] Yaniv Romano, Evan Patterson, and Emmanuel J. Candès. Conformalized quantile regression, 2019. [47] Sima Noorani, Orlando Romero, Nicolo Dal Fabbro, Hamed Hassani, and George J. Pappas. Conformal risk minimization with variance reduction, 2025. [48] David Stutz, Krishnamurthy, Dvijotham, Ali Taylan Cemgil, and Arnaud Doucet. Learning optimal conformal classifiers, 2022. [49] Linyu Liu, Yu Pan, Xiaocheng Li, and Guanting Chen. Uncertainty estimation and quantification for llms: A simple supervised approach, 2024. [50] Lukas Aichberger, Kajetan Schweighofer, Mykyta Ielanskyi, and Sepp Hochreiter. Semantically diverse language generation for uncertainty estimation in language models, 2024. [51] Jinhao Duan, Hao Cheng, Shiqi Wang, Alex Zavalny, Chenan Wang, Renjing Xu, Bhavya Kailkhura, and Kaidi Xu. Shifting attention to relevance: Towards the predictive uncertainty quantification of free-form large language models, 2024. [52] Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models, 2023. [53] Potsawee Manakul, Adian Liusie, and Mark J. F. Gales. Selfcheckgpt: Zero-resource black-box hallucination detection for generative large language models, 2023. [54] David McAllester and Luis Ortiz. Concentration inequalities for the missing mass and for histogram rule error. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 4(null):895–911, December 2003. [55] Daniel Berend and Aryeh Kontorovich. On the concentration of the missing mass, 2012. [56] Anna Ben-Hamou, Stéphane Boucheron, and Mesrob I. Ohannessian. Concentration inequalities in the infinite urn scheme for occupancy counts and the missing mass, with applications. 

Bernoulli , 23(1), February 2017. [57] Prafulla Chandra and Andrew Thangaraj. Concentration and tail bounds for missing mass. pages 1862–1866, 07 2019. [58] I. J. GOOD. The population frequencies of species and the estimation of population parameters. 

Biometrika , 40(3-4):237–264, 12 1953. 13 [59] Jayadev Acharya, Ashkan Jafarpour, Alon Orlitsky, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Optimal probability estimation with applications to prediction and classification. In Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Ingo Steinwart, editors, Proceedings of the 26th Annual Conference on Learning Theory ,volume 30 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 764–796, Princeton, NJ, USA, 12–14 Jun 2013. PMLR. [60] Alon Orlitsky and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Competitive distribution estimation: Why is good-turing good. In C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, and R. Garnett, editors, 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 28. Curran Associates, Inc., 2015. [61] Moein Falahatgar, Mesrob I Ohannessian, Alon Orlitsky, and Venkatadheeraj Pichapati. The power of absolute discounting: all-dimensional distribution estimation. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. [62] Elchanan Mossel and Mesrob I. Ohannessian. On the impossibility of learning the missing mass. Entropy , 21(1), 2019. [63] Alon Orlitsky and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Competitive distribution estimation, 2015. [64] Maciej Skorski. Mean-squared accuracy of good-turing estimator. In 2021 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) , pages 2846–2851, 2021. [65] David A. McAllester and Robert E. Schapire. On the convergence rate of good-turing estimators. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth Annual Conference on Computational Learning Theory , COLT ’00, page 1–6, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2000. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. [66] Prafulla Chandra, Aditya Pradeep, and Andrew Thangaraj. Improved tail bounds for missing mass and confidence intervals for good-turing estimator. In 2019 National Conference on Communications (NCC) , pages 1–6, 2019. [67] I. J. GOOD and G. H. TOULMIN. The number of new species, and the increase in population coverage, when a sample is increased. Biometrika , 43(1-2):45–63, 06 1956. [68] Jerzy Neyman and Egon Sharpe Pearson. Ix. on the problem of the most efficient tests of statistical hypotheses. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Containing Papers of a Mathematical or Physical Character , 231(694-706):289–337, 1933. [69] David G Luenberger. Optimization by vector space methods . John Wiley & Sons, 1969. [70] Ellis Weng and Andrew Owens. Lecture 11: The good–turing estimate. https://www.cs. cornell.edu/courses/cs6740/2010sp/guides/lec11.pdf , 2010. CS6740: Advanced Language Technologies, Cornell University. March 4, 2010. 14 Table of Contents 

A Extended Related Works 16 B Proofs 17 

B.1 Proof of Theorem 3.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 B.2 Proof of Theorem 3.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 B.3 Proof of Theorem 4.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 

C Further Experiments and Details 21 

C.1 Sub-optimal calibration procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 C.2 Performance across different budget values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 C.3 Additional comparison with baselines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 C.4 Robustness under high hallucination rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 C.5 Clustering algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 C.5.1 Comparison of alternative clustering methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 

D Missing Mass and Missing Mass Derivative 25 

D.1 Derivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 D.2 Empirical evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 15 A Extended Related Works 

Conformal Prediction. The notion of prediction sets originates from classical work on tolerance regions in statistics [ 39 , 40 ]. However, the modern formulation of Conformal Prediction (CP), which provides distribution-free, finite-sample validity guarantees, was introduced by [ 5 , 7 , 41 ]. Since then, CP has emerged as a standard framework for uncertainty quantification, particularly in classification [ 11 , 42 , 43 ] and regression tasks [ 44 –46 ]. A growing body of work have then focused on improving the set size (length) efficiency of conformal prediction sets [ 28 , 32 , 33 , 47 , 48 ]. These developments reflect the increasing demand for flexible and reliable uncertainty quantification in modern predictive systems. 

Conformal Prediction for LLMs. Recent work has explored conformal prediction as a principled tool for uncertainty quantification in Large Language Models (LLMs), where outputs are open-ended and unbounded. Conformal Language Modeling [ 13 ] introduced a sampling-and-filtering approach that generates candidate responses until a calibrated stopping rule guarantees, with high probability, that at least one correct answer lies in the set. Generative Prediction Sets (GPS) [ 20 ] recasts the problem as conformal regression on the number of samples required for a correct output, using the resulting distribution to infer minimal draw count needed to achieve nominal coverage. SCOPE-Gen [ 14 ] proposes a sequential pruning strategy using greedy admissibility filters, leveraging a Markov factorization to reduce verification costs during calibration. APIisEnough [ 21 ] offers a black-box approach that defines nonconformity via sampling frequencies and semantic similarity; their approach can be integrated in our modular framework seamlessly. Several complementary directions have further adapted CP to the generative language setting: token-level CP for non-exchangeable generation [ 25 ], representation-level conformal alignment, filtering methods for long-form factuality guarantees [ 28 , 29 , 31 ], multi-group uncertainty quantification in structured text [ 30 ], and CP for enumerable, discrete output spaces such as multiple-choice tasks [ 27 ]. While all these methods offer valid coverage, they vary in efficiency, granularity, and scope, and none explicitly incorporate missing mass estimation as a means to reason about unseen correct responses to capture the full output space. Moreover, they do not account for or optimize under an explicit query budget, a central component of our framework. In contrast, out method address both dimensions-coverage in the presence of unobserved labels and efficient query allocation-through a unified, theoretically grounded approach. 

Conformal abstention for LLMs. An alternative to constructing prediction sets is to enable selective prediction: allowing the LLM to abstain from responding when uncertain. This line of work aims to mitigate erroneous outputs by identifying in puts where the model’s predictions are unreliable. In particular, [ 22 ] apply conformal risk control to bound the probability of hallucination and derive abstention rules that trigger whenever the estimated risk exceeds a calibrated threshold.Moreover, [ 23 ]integrate CP with reinforcement learning to learn abstention policies that adaptively respond to task difficulty and distributional shifts. Separately, [ 24 ] introduce an information-theoretic decomposition of uncertainty into epistemic and aleatoric components, leveraging the epistemic signal to guide abstention decisions. While these methods share the goal of reliable decision-making under uncertainty in LLMs, they differ from our approach in that they do not produce explicit prediction sets, and therefore cannot be directly compares. One could, in principle, adapt intermediate quantities from our method-such as prediction set size or estimated missing mass-as abstention criteria, which can be an interesting venue for future work. 

Broader Uncertainty Quantification for LLMs. Our work is informed by a broad literature on uncertain quantification (UQ) for LLMs that extends beyond conformal prediction. A substantial body of research focuses on mitigating hallucinations in LLM outputs, employing techniques ranging from direct uncertainty estimation [4, 49–51] to strategies that generate multiple responses to probe and analyze the output space [ 52 ]. Prior research has observed that semantic disagreement among sampled responses correlates with hallucinations risk, motivating a suite of detection methods based on self-consistency, token-level log-probability, or verifier-based models [ 30 , 38 , 53 ]. While these heuristics have demonstrated empirical success, they generally lack formal coverage guarantees and often require extensive sampling or auxiliary models. 

Missing Mass. The missing mass problem- estimating the total probability of outcomes not observed in a given sample- has been extensively studied under the assumption of independent and identically 16 distribution (i.i.d) data. Theoretical results have established concentration inequalities for the missing mass around its expectation [ 54 – 57 ], studying the stability and predictability of this quantity in large-sample regimes. Central to practical estimation, the classical Good-Turing (GT) estimator, first introduced by [ 58 ], has been analyzed extensively, with multiple variants developed to improve its finite-sample performance [ 59 –64 ]. Confidence intervals for missing mass were obtained using the GT estimator in [ 65 ] and subsequently refined by [ 66 ]. Building upon these ideas, [ 67 ] developed the "Good-Toulmin" estimator, extending the missing mass framework to the species-discovery problem. Though conceptually related, species discovery-estimating how many new previously unseen categories are expected to appear in an enlarged sample-and missing mass estimation-which quantifies unseen probability mass-are fundamentally different in objective and interpretation. 

# B Proofs 

B.1 Proof of Theorem 3.1 

We first start by reviewing the theorem statement. Let θ(x, t ) be the missing–mass curve defined in Section 3.1, and ∆( x, t ) = θ(x, t + 1) − θ(x, t ). There exists a threshold β∗ ≤ 0 such that, almost surely, 

∆ x, T ∗(x) − 1 ≤ β∗ < ∆ x, T ∗(x) + 1 ,

or, T∗(x) = 0 whenever ∆( x, 0) ≤ β∗.Let T := {T : X → N≥0 measurable | E[T (X)] ≤ B} and let T ∗ ∈ T be an optimal solution. For β ≤ 0 define the measurable sets 

Aβ := {x : ∆( x, T ∗(x) − 1) > β, and T ∗(x) > 0}, Bβ := {x : ∆( x, T ∗(x) + 1) ≤ β}.

Because ∆( x, T ∗(x)) ≤ ∆( x, T ∗(x) + 1) , the sets Aβ and Bβ are disjoint. We can now prove the following claim. 

Claim. p(Aβ ) p(Bβ ) = 0 for every β ≤ 0.

Proof of the claim. Assume p(Aβ ), p (Bβ ) > 0. Take measurable A ⊆ Aβ , B ⊆ Bβ with p(A) = 

p(B) = η > 0 (this exists due to the assumption that X is a continuous random variable) and set 

T ′(x) := 



T ∗(x) − 1, x ∈ Aβ ,T ∗(x) + 1 , x ∈ Bβ ,T ∗(x), otherwise .

Then we have, 

E[T ′(X)] = EX

T ∗(X) − 1[X ∈ Aβ ] + 1[X ∈ Bβ ] = E[T ∗(X)] ≤ B, 

therefore, T ′ ∈ T . Furthermore, 

Eθ(X, T ′(X)) −θ(X, T ∗(X)) 

> (a)

= − E[1[X ∈ Aβ ] ∆( X, T ∗(X) − 1)] + E[1[X ∈ Bβ ] ∆( X, T ∗(X))] 

> (b)

≤ − E[1[X ∈ Aβ ] ∆( X, T ∗(X) − 1)] + E[1[X ∈ Bβ ] ∆( X, T ∗(X) + 1)] 

> (c)

< E[1[X ∈ Aβ ] β] + E[1[X ∈ Bβ ] β]

> (d)

= − ηβ + ηβ = 0 ,

where (a) follows from the definition of T ′, (b) stems from Lemma B.1 which indicates the dimin-ishing return property, (c) follows from the definitions of Aβ and Bβ , and finally, (d) is due to the definition of η. This is a contradiction with the optimality of T ∗, hence we proved the claim. 

Existence and characterization of the threshold β∗. Define the threshold β∗ by setting 

β∗ := inf β ≤ 0 : p(Aβ ) = 0 .

17 Intuitively, this threshold separates covariate points into two groups: those for which an additional query would yield a marginal improvement strictly greater than β∗, and those for which the marginal improvement from additional queries is at most β∗. To see why β∗ is indeed the correct threshold, suppose there existed covariates violating the threshold condition at this β∗. Then, we could slightly perturb the threshold, obtaining a nearby threshold β′ such that both sets Aβ′ and Bβ′ simultaneously have positive probability. But this situation would directly contradict the claim we proved earlier, which ensures that at no threshold can both Aβ and Bβ have positive probability. Thus, no violation at threshold β∗ can occur, confirming that β∗ is precisely the desired threshold. We now formalize this intuition precisely. Define the violation probabilities 

f (β) := p(Aβ ) and g(β) := p(Bβ ), β ≤ 0.

Observe that enlarging the threshold β reduces the set Aβ and expands the set Bβ . Therefore, the function f (β) is non-increasing and right-continuous, and g(β) is non-decreasing and left-continuous. Additionally, at β = 0 , we have f (0) = 0 , since by construction ∆( x, t ) ≤ 0.By right-continuity of f (·), it follows immediately from the definition of β∗ that 

p(Aβ∗ ) = f (β∗) = 0 .

Next, assume towards contradiction that p(Bβ∗ ) > 0. By left-continuity of g(·), there would exist an ε > 0 sufficiently small so that p(Bβ∗−ε) > 0. However, by the definition of β∗, lowering the threshold to β∗ − ε would yield p(Aβ∗−ε) > 0. Thus, at threshold β∗ − ε, both Aβ∗−ε and Bβ∗−ε

would simultaneously have positive probability, contradicting the claim we previously established. Hence, we must have 

p(Bβ∗ ) = 0 .

Finally, since p(Aβ∗ ) = 0 and p(Bβ∗ ) = 0 , we have for almost every x:

∆ x, T ∗(x) − 1 ≤ β∗ < ∆ x, T ∗(x) + 1 .

In the corner case where ∆( x, 0) ≤ β∗, the definition of Aβ∗ forces the optimal query count 

T ∗(x) = 0 . This establishes precisely the threshold characterization asserted in the theorem, thereby completing the proof. We now prove the following lemma, which we used in the above proof. 

Lemma B.1 (Diminishing Returns) . For every fixed covariate x ∈ X , the marginal 

∆( x, t ) = θ(x, t + 1) − θ(x, t ), t ≥ 0,

is strictly negative and non-decreasing in t; that is, 

∆( x, t ) < 0 and ∆( x, t + 1) ≥ ∆( x, t ) ∀ t ≥ 0.

Lemma B.1 establishes that as t increases, the missing mass θ(x, t ) naturally decreases, and does so with diminishing returns, meaning each additional query is less likely to reduce the uncertainty than the previous one. Thus the derivative of the missing mass, namely ∆( x, t ) is negative and non-decreasing in t.

Proof. The missing mass is 

θ(x, t ) = Pr 

> Y,Z t(x)

[Y /∈ Zt(x) | X = x] = EY,Z t(x)|X=x[1{Y /∈ Zt(x)}].

Applying law of total expectation 

θ(x, t ) = EY |X=x EZt(x)|Y,X =x[1{Y /∈ Zt(x)}].

and evaluating the inner expectation Conditioned on Y = y, the t draws in Zt(x) miss y with probability (1 − p(y | x)) t, hence 

θ(x, t ) = EY |X=x

(1 − p(Y | x)) t.

18 The, the finite difference becomes: 

∆( x, t ) = θ(x, t + 1) − θ(x, t )= EY

(1 − p(Y | x)) t+1 − (1 − p(Y | x)) t

= − EY

(1 − p(Y | x)) t p(Y | x).

For each y, (1 − p(y | x)) t is decreasing in t. Multiplying by the positive p(y | x) preserves this property, and expectation is linear; therefore the sequence gt(x) := EY [(1 − p(Y | x)) tp(Y | x)] is non-increasing, so ∆( x, t ) = −gt(x) is non-decreasing. 

B.2 Proof of Theorem 3.2 

Let’s start by restating the optimisation problem: For every input x ∈ X the fixed query policy 

T : X → N returns the random multiset Z(x) = Z T (x), x  = {yx 

> 1

, . . . , y xT (x)}. A set map f

outputs the prediction set C(x) = f x, Z (x) ⊆ Z(x) ∪ { EE }. The goal is 

min  

> f

E

λ 1{EE ∈ C(X)} + X 

> y̸=EE

1{y ∈ C(X)}



s. t. Pr Y ∈ C(X) ≥ 1 − α. 

(6) Let us first outline the strategy for the proof clearly. The optimization problem (4) involves selecting subsets of labels to minimize the frequency of including the abstract label EE and the size of the prediction sets, subject to a coverage constraint. To solve this precisely, we begin by introducing a relaxation to a linear programming problem, argue strong duality and optimality conditions, and then show the relaxation introduces no strictly better fractional solutions, hence the relaxation is actually equivalent to the original problem. Finally, we identify the optimal solution explicitly and demonstrate it has the threshold-based structure stated in the theorem. 

Relaxation to a Linear Program. For each x ∈ X and realized set Z(x), define a selection variable, 

g(x, Z (x), y ) ∈ [0 , 1] , y ∈ Z(x) ∪ { EE }

which represents the probability of including label y in the prediction set for covariate x and sampled set Z(x). Replacing f by g and allowing the full interval [0 , 1] , the optimization problem (4) can then be relaxed to: 

min  

> g

E

λ g (X, Z (X), EE ) + X 

> y̸=EE

g X, Z (X), y 

s. t. Eg X, Z (X), Y  ≥ 1 − α, 

(7) This relaxation enlarges the feasible region, i.e., its feasible region contains that of the discrete problem (6) (simply restrict g to {0, 1}), hence the optimal value of (7) is no larger than the optimum of the original integer-valued problem (6). Both objective and constraint are linear in g, so (LP) is a linear programme. In particular, This is a linear programme with one linear constraint, identical in form to the Neyman–Pearson allocation problem. The classical lemma (see, [ 68 ] for the case of finite dimensional optimization and Theorem 1, Section 8.3 of [ 69 ] for infinite dimensional optimization) states that an optimal solution is obtained by selecting those labels with largest benefit–to–cost ratio until the coverage constraint is met, possibly randomizing on a single tie. As we assumed that there is no mass-point in the underlying distribution, tie-breaking randomization is not necessary, a situation that similarly arises in the original derivation of Neyman–Pearson lemma. Here the benefit of label y (EE or not) is p(y | x). However, the cost is 1 when y̸ = EE and λ when 

y = EE . The benefit–to–cost ratio ordering is therefore equivalent to ordering by the non - conformity score 

S0(x, y ) := 

(

1 − p(y | x), y̸ = EE ,

1 − p(EE |x) 

> λ

, y = EE .

19 As a result of Neyman–Pearson lemma, there exists a threshold q∗ 

> 0

∈ R such that, 

g⋆(x, Z, y ) := 1 {S0(x, y ) ≤ q∗ 

> 0

} , (8) where g∗ is the optimal solution to (7) . This automatically results that the relaxed optimization problem (7) is equivalent to the original integer problem (6) , as the optimal solution to (7) is of the integer form. That is to say, f ∗ := g∗ is also the optimal solution to (6) . We now focus on g∗ and show that one can rewrite the same decision rule in the form that is described in Theorem 3.2. The decision rule, g∗, depends solely on the level sets of S0. Here, the key observation is the set of selected labels depends on the level-sets of the function g∗, rather than the values it takes. We may therefore apply any strictly decreasing transformation to S0 without changing the selected labels. First, translate the EE row by +1 to obtain 

S1(x, y ) := 

(

1 − p(y | x), y̸ = EE ,

2 − p(EE |x) 

> λ

, y = EE .

To ensure this transformation does not interfere with the ordering of the original labels, we require that 

λ is sufficiently large. This guarantees that for any y̸ = EE , we have 1 − p(EE | x)

λ > 1 − p(y | x),

so the EE score in S0 is strictly greater than the scores assigned to any concrete label (here we also used the fact that p(y | x) > 0, which is true as y is one of the "seen" samples, hence the probability of it should be non-zero). Then, shifting the EE score by +1 preserves the separation of score ranges: all concrete labels lie in (0 , 1] and EE lies in (1 , 2] .Next, apply the strictly decreasing map t 7 → 2 − λ(2 − t) on (1 , 2] ; this leaves the concrete labels untouched and sends the EE score to 2 − p(EE | x). The resulting score 

S(x, y ) := 

1 − p(y | x), y̸ = EE 2 − p(EE | x), y = EE 

induces exactly the same selection rule and matches (5) . That is, the optimal solution to is of the form: {y : S(x, y ) ≤ q⋆} for some q∗ ∈ R. This concludes the Theorem 3.2. 

B.3 Proof of Theorem 4.1 Proof of Theorem 4.1 (Coverage Validity). 

Define the conformity scores: 

si = ˆS(Xi, Y i), ∀(Xi, Y i) ∈ D cal 2 , and stest = ˆS(Xtest , Y test ).

The prediction set is defined as: 

C(Xtest ) = {y ∈ Z(Xtest )∪{ EE } : ˆS(Xtest , y ) ≤ q∗}, where q∗ = Quantile 1−α(s1, . . . , s N2 , ∞).

We now derive a chain of equalities and inequalities: 

Pr[ Ytest ∈ C(Xtest )] (a)

= Pr[ stest ≤ q∗] (a)

= Pr stest ≤ Quantile 1−α(s1, . . . , s N2 , ∞)

> (b)

= E 1

N2 + 1 

> N2+1

X

> i=1

I si ≤ Quantile 1−α(s1, . . . , s N2 , s test )  

> (c)

≥ 1 − α, 

where, (a) By definition of the prediction set and q∗.(b) Follows from exchangeability of the scores {s1, . . . , s N2 , s test }, since (Xtest , Y test ) is exchangeable with the calibration pairs. (c) By definition of the (1 − α) quantile, at least a 1 − α fraction of the N2 + 1 values are less than or equal to it. Therefore, we conclude: 

Pr[ Ytest ∈ C(Xtest )] ≥ 1 − α, 

as required. □

20 C Further Experiments and Details 

C.1 Sub-optimal calibration procedure 

In our fine-grained, component-wise comparisons, we employ a simple yet valid calibration rule to ensure empirical coverage at the target level 1 − α. This serves as a sub-optimal but interpretable baseline for evaluating the contributions of each algorithmic principle. To calibrate, we perform a grid search over a set of candidate thresholds {τ1, . . . , τ m} ⊂ [0 , 1] ,uniformly spaced across the interval. For each candidate threshold τi, we apply the following two-step procedure on the calibration data (xi, y i)ni=1 : (i) include the fallback EE cluster in the prediction set if its estimated probability satisfies P(EE ) ≥ τi. (ii) sort the remaining clusters by their probabilities in descending order, and sequentially add them to the prediction set until the cumulative probability mass exceeds 1 − τi. We then compute the empirical coverage at each threshold: 

cov (τi) = 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

{yi ∈ Cτi (xi)}

where Cτi (xi) denotes the prediction set constructed with threshold τi. We choose τ ∗ = min {τ ∈{τ1, . . . , τ m} : cov (τi) ≥ 1 − α}.At test time, we construct prediction sets using the calibrated threshold τ ∗ via the same two-step strategy: include EE if its predicted probability satisfies P(EE ) ≥ τ ∗, and then add remaining non-EE 

clusters in order of decreasing probability until the cumulative mass exceeds 1 − τ ∗.

C.2 Performance across different budget values 

To assess the robustness of each algorithmic component under varying resource limits, we conduct experiments at two additional budget levels for every dataset. These settings are chosen to span regimes where additional queries provide substantial gains (low budget) versus diminishing returns (high budget). Figure 2 shows that in all settings, progressively adding adaptive optimal querying (principle 1) and conformal calibration (principle 2) consistently improves or maintains performance relative to the vanilla baseline. Notably, the largest reductions in EE –fraction occur under tighter budget constraints—when the average number of queries per input is small relative to the model’s inherent uncertainty and the difficulty of the dataset. In these regimes, adaptive querying provides the greatest benefit by allocating queries more strategically, thus increasing the likelihood of observing informative labels. In contrast, when the budget is generous enough that most correct answers are already revealed through uniform sampling, the marginal gains from adaptive querying diminish—but are never harmful. These results collectively reinforce that CPQ delivers targeted gains with the addition of each optimal modular component. 

C.3 Additional comparison with baselines 

In this section, we provide further comparison of our algorithm CPQ with CLM and SCOPE-Gen across varying nominal coverage levels for each dataset. Since scope-gen and CLM do not explicitly control the query budget; their number of queries varies depending on the dataset and the desired coverage level. To ensure a fair comparison under shared resource constraints, we first compute the average number of queries used by both CLM and SCOPE-Gen at each coverage level, and configure CPQ to operate under the minimum of these two query budgets. While this setup may disadvantage CPQ in cases where a baseline uses a larger query budget, Table 2 shows that CPQ still consistently achieves tighter empirical coverage and lower EE fractions. 

C.4 Robustness under high hallucination rates 

LLMs are inherently prone to hallucinations. While all of our experiments involve black-box LLMs which already exhibit nontrivial hallucination behavior, we additionally evaluate robustness under settings with elevated hallucination rates. To this end, in this section we consider SimpleQA, an adversarial benchmark specifically designed to expose hallucination failures in GPT models. 21 Figure 2: Comparison of the fine-grained variants—vanilla baseline, optimal adaptive querying strategy (Principle 1), and full CPQ (Principles 1 + 2)—under two different budget levels for each dataset. For BBH-Geometric Shapes, the corresponding budget levels are 20 and 40 ; for BBH Date Understanding, 10 and 25; and for GSM8K, 20 and 30. Shaded regions correspond to the standard deviation over ten independent runs. 22 Dataset Algorithm Nom. Cov. Emp. Cov. EE Frac. 

GSM8K 

CLM 0.97 0.93 ± 0.02 0.74 ± 0.09 

Scope-Gen 0.97 0.93 ± 0.05 0.56 ± 0.32 

CPQ 0.97 0.96 ± 0.02 0.48 ± 0.15 

CLM 0.90 0.89 ± 0.05 0.54 ± 0.14 

Scope-Gen 0.90 0.86 ± 0.06 0.10 ± 0.12 

CPQ 0.90 0.89 ± 0.03 0.00 ± 0.00 

CLM 0.85 0.86 ± 0.05 0.48 ± 0.04 

Scope-Gen 0.85 0.85 ± 0.07 0.01 ± 0.02 

CPQ 0.85 0.84 ± 0.04 0.00 ± 0.00 

CLM 0.80 0.83 ± 0.03 0.48 ± 0.04 

Scope-Gen 0.80 0.84 ± 0.02 0.00 ± 0.00 

CPQ 0.80 0.79 ± 0.03 0.00 ± 0.00 

BBH - Geometric Shapes 

CLM 0.90 0.88 ± 0.05 0.77 ± 0.05 

Scope-Gen 0.90 0.95 ± 0.03 0.93 ± 0.05 

CPQ 0.90 0.90 ± 0.03 0.76 ± 0.06 

CLM 0.80 0.73 ± 0.08 0.60 ± 0.09 

Scope-Gen 0.80 0.85 ± 0.04 0.76 ± 0.04 

CPQ 0.80 0.81 ± 0.05 0.52 ± 0.10 

CLM 0.70 0.65 ± 0.07 0.49 ± 0.08 

Scope-Gen 0.70 0.80 ± 0.05 0.70 ± 0.08 

CPQ 0.70 0.70 ± 0.06 0.20 ± 0.12 

CLM 0.50 0.42 ± 0.08 0.21 ± 0.06 

Scope-Gen 0.50 0.58 ± 0.10 0.12 ± 0.19 

CPQ 0.50 0.50 ± 0.07 0.00 ± 0.00 

BBH - Date Understanding 

CLM 0.90 0.84 ± 0.06 0.63 ± 0.08 

Scope-Gen 0.90 0.96 ± 0.05 0.92 ± 0.10 

CPQ 0.90 0.90 ± 0.03 0.72 ± 0.06 

CLM 0.80 0.72 ± 0.10 0.41 ± 0.12 

Scope-Gen 0.80 0.88 ± 0.04 0.71 ± 0.05 

CPQ 0.80 0.81 ± 0.04 0.47 ± 0.06 

CLM 0.60 0.52 ± 0.08 0.12 ± 0.05 

Scope-Gen 0.60 0.68 ± 0.06 0.33 ± 0.08 

CPQ 0.60 0.61 ± 0.06 0.06 ± 0.04 

CLM 0.50 0.45 ± 0.08 0.05 ± 0.05 

Scope-Gen 0.50 0.60 ± 0.08 0.17 ± 0.05 

CPQ 0.50 0.51 ± 0.08 0.00 ± 0.01 

Table 2: Comparison of CPQ with CLM and SCOPE-Gen across nominal coverage levels on GSM8K, BBH–Geometric Shapes, and BBH–Date Understanding. CPQ is constrained to the lowest average query budget used by the baselines at each coverage level. Despite this restriction, CPQ maintains tighter empirical coverage and lower EE fractions. 23 Table 3 reports our results on GPT-4o generations under this high-hallucination setting. Even in this challenging regime, we observe consistent improvement using our method, following the same trends observed in the main body. 

Algorithm 1 − α Emp Cov ± Std EE ± Std Avg Set Size ± Std 

—Vanilla 0.60 0.62 ± 0.04 0.16 ± 0.03 0.85 ± 0.02 P1 0.60 0.59 ± 0.06 0.11 ± 0.03 1.20 ± 0.14 

P1 + P2 (CPQ) 0.60 0.61 ± 0.05 0.04 ± 0.04 3.47 ± 0.53 

Vanilla 0.65 0.65 ± 0.06 0.19 ± 0.05 0.89 ± 0.07 P1 0.65 0.63 ± 0.06 0.16 ± 0.05 1.28 ± 0.14 

P1 + P2 (CPQ) 0.65 0.65 ± 0.05 0.11 ± 0.06 2.89 ± 0.67 

Vanilla 0.70 0.68 ± 0.07 0.23 ± 0.06 0.89 ± 0.03 P1 0.70 0.68 ± 0.05 0.22 ± 0.04 1.04 ± 0.04 

P1 + P2 (CPQ) 0.70 0.69 ± 0.04 0.18 ± 0.06 1.93 ± 0.58 

Vanilla 0.80 0.82 ± 0.06 0.48 ± 0.10 1.15 ± 0.21 P1 0.80 0.79 ± 0.06 0.41 ± 0.11 1.77 ± 0.80 

P1 + P2 (CPQ) 0.80 0.79 ± 0.05 0.40 ± 0.09 1.70 ± 0.18 

Table 3: Performance under high hallucination rates (SimpleQA, GPT-4o) 

C.5 Clustering algorithm 

To group semantically equivalent answers, we apply a relaxed clustering procedure based on pairwise entailment checks using LLaMA-3-8B [ 35 ]. Given a question x and two candidate responses y1

and y2, we query LLaMA-3-8B twice: once to determine whether y1 entails y2, and once for the reverse direction. We declare two responses as a match under a relaxed bidirectional entailment criterion: one direction must return entailment , and the other must return either entailment or 

neutral . This relaxation tolerates mild asymmetries when one answer adds detail without changing the core meaning. Using this matching function, we construct clusters through a simple iterative merging process. Each response is compares against existing clusters, and added to the first cluster containing a match; otherwise it initiates a new cluster. This bucket-merge strategy, while simple, produced highly coherent clusters in practice and was robust across datasets. We emphasize that CPQ is agnostic to the particular clustering routine used. Any method that produces coherent and valid clusters—whether heuristic, learned, or rule-based—can be substituted. Below we provide the exact system and user prompts used for LLaMA entailment checks, followed by the pseudo code for our relaxed clustering procedure: 

> System: You are an expert at determining semantic entailment between answers to questions. Given a question and two answers, determine if Answer 1 entails Answer 2. Respond with only one word: entailment, contradiction, or neutral. User: Question: <QUESTION> Answer 1: <RESP1> Answer 2: <RESP2> Does Answer 1 semantically entail Answer 2?

24 Algorithm 2 Relaxed Entailment Clustering 

Input: question x, responses {yi}Ti=1  

> MATCH

Function (via LLaMA)  

> 1:

function MATCH (x, a, b ) 

> 2:

ent1 ← LLaMAEntail (x, a, b ) 

> 3:

ent2 ← LLaMAEntail (x, b, a ) 

> 4:

return (ent1 == entailment and ent2 ∈ { entailment , neutral })or (ent2 == entailment and ent1 ∈ { entailment , neutral }) 

> 5:

end function 

Clustering 

• Initialize empty cluster set: C ← ∅ 

• for each response yi ∈ { y1, . . . , y T }:• if ∃ c ∈ C , y ∈ c such that MATCH (x, y i, y ) returns True : add yi to cluster c

• else: create new cluster {yi} and add it to C

Output: clusters C

C.5.1 Comparison of alternative clustering methods 

Although clustering is not the primary focus of our work, it serves as a necessary pre-processing step when applying our method to natural language outputs. To ensure that our conclusions are not sensitive to the particular clustering strategy used, we conducted an ablation study comparing several representative methods on the TriviaQA dataset and evaluated their effect on our algorithm’s downstream performance. We considered the following clustering methods: • LLaMA-3-8B Entailment (default) : Pairwise entailment queries between responses using LLaMA-3-8B. • W2V: Averaging 300-dimensional Word2Vec embeddings per response and clustering with KMeans • Cosine similarity: Embedding each response with a MiniLM encoder and linking responses with cosine similarity ≥ 0.85 .• NLI-based: using a fine-tuned RoBERTa-Large model instead for entailment. We evaluate across two metrics, namely pairwise overlap and Jaccard similarity (intersection-over-union of clusters across methods), as well as downstream CP metrics (coverage, EE fraction) to evaluate the impact of clustering variation on the behavior of our algorithm. As shown in Table 4, all clustering methods produced highly consistent partitions of the model outputs, with pairwise overlaps exceeding 0.88 and Jaccard similarities above 0.80 . The downstream CP results in Table 5 confirm that these differences in clustering had only a minimal effect on the final results. Across all methods, the coverage and EE fraction difference remained statistically insignificant. These results suggest that as long as semantically similar outputs are grouped reasonably well, the specific clustering method has little effect on overall performance. That said, clustering remains an active research area, especially for very long-form or domain-specific generations, and users can leverage advances in NLP to fit their particular use cases. 

# D Missing Mass and Missing Mass Derivative 

In this section, we will first derive an estimator for the missing mass derivative introduced in Section 4, and then empirically evaluate its performance on two synthetic distributions. 25 Method Pair Overlap Jaccard 

RoBERTa vs Cosine-MiniLM 0.91 0.91 RoBERTa vs W2V 0.90 0.83 RoBERTa vs LLaMA 0.88 0.81 Cosine-MiniLM vs W2V 0.95 0.82 Cosine-MiniLM vs LLaMA 0.94 0.83 W2V vs LLaMA 0.93 0.87 Table 4: Average Pairwise Overlap and Jaccard Similarity Between Clustering Methods 

Clustering Method 1 − α Coverage EE Fraction 

RoBERTa 0.8 0.81 ± 0.03 0.42 ± 0.05 0.6 0.61 ± 0.02 0.09 ± 0.02 W2V 0.8 0.81 ± 0.02 0.44 ± 0.04 0.6 0.62 ± 0.03 0.10 ± 0.02 Cosine-MiniLM 0.8 0.82 ± 0.02 0.44 ± 0.05 0.6 0.62 ± 0.03 0.09 ± 0.02 

LLaMA (default) 0.8 0.80 ± 0.02 0.42 ± 0.02 

0.6 0.61 ± 0.02 0.08 ± 0.01 Table 5: Performance of CPQ with Different Clustering Methods on TriviaQA (LLaMA-3-8B Generations) 

D.1 Derivation 

In this section, we study the problem of estimating the missing mass and its rate of change. We abstract away from any specific context (such as input x) and define the missing mass problem in a general form. The missing mass is the probability of observing a previously unseen label if we were to draw one additional sample after observing t i.i.d. samples from a discrete distribution. The classical Good–Turing estimator addresses this problem. Here, we derive an estimator for the derivative of the missing mass, which quantifies the rate at which the mass of unseen labels is shrinking as more samples are collected. We begin by introducing some key quantities and explaining a generative process that mirrors the derivation of the classical Good–Turing estimator, following the notation and exposition from [ 70 ]. We then use similar principles to derive an estimator for the rate of change in the missing mass. Let Y be the label space, and W denote the sequence of T independent samples W = {w1, . . . , w t}

where wk ∈ Y . Let θj be the probability that a future sample will be yj , where we’d like to account for the probability of yj occurring even if it has not appeared in the sample W . Thus, a simple frequency #( yj ) 

> T

does not suffice, where #( yj ) is defined as the number of times label yj ∈ Y appears in W . Throughout this derivation, we assume that θj = θj′ if #( yj ) = #( yj′ ), thus two samples appear the same amount of times if they have the same probability of occurring. This assumption is also needed for the classical derivation of the Good-Turing estimator. Though not realistic, this assumption reduces the number of parameters significantly. Let Nr = |{ yj : #( yj ) = r}| be the number of labels that occur exactly r times in W . Let θ(r)

denote the probability of a label occuring given that it appeared r times in W .To derive an estimate for 

θ(r), consider the following generative process: assume we have access to θj . Draw j and hence also 

θj uniformly at random from the label space Y. Then. flip a coin t times, where θj is the probability of success. Then the number of successes is the number of times yj appears. if yj appears r times, put θj in θ(r). At the end θ(r) will approximately be the average of the θj for which #( yj ) = r.Precisely 

ˆθ(r) = Eθj |#( yj ) = r = X

> j

θj Pθj |#( yj ) = r

26 Now, condition on θj by applying Bayes rules , and given the uniform prior on P(θj ) = 1 

> m

, we obtain the following for the probability of a yj appearing given that it has appeared r times is 

P 

> j

θj P#( yj ) = r | θj

P 

> j′

θj′ P#( yj′ ) = r | θj′



We can rewrite both the numerator and the denominator in terms of the pdf of the binomial distribution: 

P 

> j

θj

 tr

θrj (1 − θj )t−r

P 

> j′

θj′

 tr

θrj′ (1 − θj′ )t−r

We can rewrite the denominator in terms of Ein t[Nr ], the expected value of Nr given that we flipped 

t coins at each step of our experiments, yielding the following equation: 

1

Ein t[Nr ]

X

> j

θj

tr



θrj (1 − θj )t−r

This quantity is estimating the probability of a label conditioned on it appearing exactly r times in the sample—that is, the expected value of θj given #( yj ) = r. However, what we actually want is the total probability mass of all such labels. To obtain that, we need to multiply the average by the 

number of labels that appeared r times. Notably, the denominator of the expression we derived is 

E[Nr ], the expected number of such labels. So in fact, the numerator alone gives an estimation of the total probability mass. Furthermore, we’d like to derive and estimate of the change in missing mass, we set r = 0 ,thus we are interested in the following quantity: 

X

> j

θj (1 − θj )t+1 − X

> j

θj (1 − θj )t = X

> j

−θ2 

> j

(1 − θj )t

= −2(t + 2)( t + 1) 

X

> j

t + 2 2



θ2 

> j

(1 − θj )t

> (a)

= −2(t + 2)( t + 1) Ein t+2 

N2



> (b)

≈ −2N2

t2

where (a) follows from the fact that Ein t+2 

N2

 = P

> j

 t+2 2

θ2 

> j

(1 − θj )t which is due to a simple counting argument. (b) is due to an approximation for sufficiently large t, and plugging N2 as 

Ein t+2 

N2

.Hence, this yields our proposed estimator introduced in Section 4 for the missing mass rate of decay 

ˆ∆( t) = −2N2

t2

.

D.2 Empirical evaluation 

We conduct experiments on two synthetic distributions over a support of size 100: (i) a uniform distribution, πi = 1 /100 for all i, and (ii) a geometric distribution, πi = p (1 − p)i−1 with p = 0 .05 .Figure 3 presents two panels for each distribution. In the left panels, we compare the true missing mass θ(t) (red dashed) against the Good–Turing estimate ˆθ(t) (blue solid). In the right panels, we compare the true derivative (red dashed) against our proposed derivative estimator ˆ∆( t) = −2N2

> t2

(blue) and the naive finite-difference of the Good-Turing estimator baseline ˆ∆( t) = ˆθ(t + 1) − ˆθ(t)

(Green). Across both distributions, the Good–Turing estimator closely tracks the ground truth and its variance decays as more observations are collected. Similarly, our estimator closely captures the decay rate of the missing-mass derivative with substantially lower variance and fluctuations than the naive difference-based baseline. 27 Figure 3: Empirical comparison of missing mass and its derivative estimators on two synthetic distributions: uniform (top panels) and geometric with p = 0 .05 (bottom panels). Left panels: true missing mass (red dashed line) versus the Good–Turing estimator (blue solid line). Right panels: 

true derivative (red dashed line) compared to our proposed derivative estimator (blue) and the naive finite-difference baseline (green). The standard deviation after averaging across 100 independent trials is represented by the shaded region in each corresponding color. 

# NeurIPS Paper Checklist 

1. Claims 

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope? Answer: [Yes] Justification: All of our contributions and claims are properly explained in the abstract and introduction Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper. • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers. • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings. • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper. 2. Limitations 

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We discuss the limitations of our current work and possible avenues for future research in a separate section called Limitation and Future work. 28 Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper. • The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper. • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be. • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated. • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon. • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size. • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness. • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations. 3. Theory assumptions and proofs 

Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Due to space limit, we have moved all the proofs to the supplementary material, where we show full derivations of the proofs carefully, and clearly state all assumptions. We provide references for technical details as needed. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results. • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced. • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems. • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition. • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material. • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced. 4. Experimental result reproducibility 

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Our experimental setting is well explained in the main body of the paper, with specifics and all extra details of the implementations provided in the supplementary material due to space limit. Further, we will publish our code for the camera ready version in case of acceptance. 29 Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not. • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable. • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed. • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm. (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully. (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset). (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results. 5. Open access to data and code 

Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We will publish our code for the camera ready version in case of acceptance, and we will ensure instructions are clearly stated. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code. • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark). • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc. • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why. 30 • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable). • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted. 6. Experimental setting/details 

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the results? Answer: [Yes] Justification: All details needed for a self-contained experiments section are provided, the main body. Further specifics are provided in the appendix for completeness and exact reproducibility. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them. • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material. 7. Experiment statistical significance 

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Yes, we provide all necessary statistics including error-bars for a fair compari-son. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper. • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions). • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.) • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors). • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean. • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified. • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates). • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text. 8. Experiments compute resources 

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments? Answer: [Yes] 31 Justification: To generate responses from the LLM, we can rely on API access which would remove the need for local GPU resources. The estimated total run-time of the experiments for this paper is in order of 3-5 hours, with majority of the time spent querying the LLM. The algorithm itself after these generations, runs in a matter of few minutes. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage. • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute. • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into the paper). 9. Code of ethics 

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?Answer: [Yes] Justification: This paper has no forseeable ethical issues. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. • If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics. • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction). 10. Broader impacts 

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We propose a general framework for quantifying the uncertainty with LLMs, which can have positive direct societal impact and applications in all application of LLMs, including areas such as healthcare. We do not anticipate any negative societal impact. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed. • If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact. • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations. • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster. • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology. • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML). 32 11. Safeguards 

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)? Answer: [NA] Justification: We do not see any foreseeable need for safeguards. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks. • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters. • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images. • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort. 12. Licenses for existing assets 

Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected? Answer: [NA] Justification: We have cite and credited all models and datasets used in our experiments. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets. • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset. • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL. • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset. • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided. • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets 

has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset. • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided. • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s creators. 13. New assets 

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets? Answer: [NA] Justification: There is no new asset as an output. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets. • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc. • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used. 33 • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file. 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects 

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)? Answer: [NA] Justification: our experiments do not involve human subjects. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper. • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector. 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects 

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained? Answer: [NA] Justification: Our paper does not include such studies. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper. • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution. • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review. 16. Declaration of LLM usage 

Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required. Answer: [NA] Justification: The core methods do not involve LLM as any important, original, or non-standard component. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components. • Please refer to our LLM policy ( https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM )for what should or should not be described. 34